\documentclass{tufte-handout}
\title{Recap of MAVERIC Wiki Changes}
\author{Andy Zimolzak, MD, MMSc}
\date{November 19, 2014}

\begin{document}

\maketitle

~\\

The MAVERIC wiki\footnote{http://vhabosapp8/wiki} was created in
December 2010. It was evidently used a fair amount through October
2011. Starting June 2014, usage has picked up again. The
\texttt{vhabosapp8} server that hosts the wiki also hosts Subversion
repositories and the Jira issue and project tracker.

\section{Problem/niche}

The Precision Oncology Project and the Point of Care Trial project
rely on a workflow that goes as follows. \emph{First,} subject matter
expert knows that we want to track the effect of drug $x$ on (for
example) serum sodium. SME attempts to operationalize the concept of
serum sodium, suggesting a list of terms to be searched for in a field
(e.g.\ \texttt{LabChemTestName}) of CDW. \emph{Second,} data pull team
returns a list of lab tests matching these search terms.\footnote{The
  list sent to the SME is often an Excel file. Data extractor probably
  generates SQL code in the process.} \emph{Third,} SME reviews list
of tests and decides (adjudicates) which items truly match the
concept. SME returns either a refined general rule to specify which
items match the concept, or an enumerated list of which items match
the concept.\footnote{So far I return this adjudication to Beth in the
  form of an edited Excel file.} \emph{Fourth,} data pull team creates
query that represents this adjudication.\footnote{probably generating
  refined SQL code.} The clinical SME may give formal approval or
``sign off'' on the data pull at step 3, or possibly on the results of
step 4.

Data pull and NLP teams intend to use the wiki to capture this
workflow so that these deliverables are \emph{available for reuse} in
a library, for the purposes of other projects; \emph{available for
  discussion} with their ``provenance'' (responsible SME and data
extractor) clearly noted; and \emph{available for renewal,} with their
date of creation clearly noted, because CDW elements may change over
time. The rationale for the SME including/excluding certain tests can
be documented. 

% left off here

\section{What has changed recently}

\paragraph{October 23--28} I created several standard templates that
can be used in multiple places, to avoid duplicating the same wikitext
code. These are mainly for Data Pull and NLP subsections of the wiki. 

\paragraph{October 29} Organize the Data Pull wiki page structure. 

\paragraph{October 30} Start using for ``POP Additional Documents''
and sodium.

\paragraph{November 5} Shadow wiki created.

\paragraph{November 6} Magnesium, ALT.

\paragraph{November 12} Shadow wiki becomes real wiki.

\paragraph{November 12--14} Magnesium, ALT, POP surgical procedures,
ALT, AST.

\section{Flaws in wiki}

Where does the actual SQL go? Here is what the current Data Pull
template looks like.

\section{Suggestions for you all in future}

Don't upload enormous things. Use talk pages. 

\section{Questions for the group}

\begin{itemize}

\item What should we call the deliverable that the data pull expert
  and the SME create in collaboration?\footnote{Suggestions: data
    model, concept model, algorithm, adjudication, library}

\item Is the wiki the right place for SQL code?

\item Training on the wiki?

\item How does wiki fit in with data pull request tracker?

\end{itemize}

\section{About MediaWiki}

``A wiki is a Web application which allows people to add, modify, or
delete content in collaboration with
others.''\footnote{http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wiki} MediaWiki is the
software that makes Wikipedia run, but anyone can install it to their
Web server to create their own wiki. The \texttt{vhabosapp8} server
runs Red Hat Enterprise Linux, Apache, MySQL, and PHP. Currently 13
out of 74 GB of space is free on \texttt{vhabosapp8}.

\end{document}

% LocalWords:  MAVERIC vhabosapp Jira workflow SME operationalize CDW DMR CSPCC
% LocalWords:  LabChemTestName workflows MediaWiki MySQL PHP wikitext AST
